#### Uneasy Social: The Telekommunisten Assembly @transmediale

[Baruch Gottlieb](http://telekommunisten.net/author/baruch/)

We all know easy social.  You say hello, someone says hello back.  But then the
uneasiness begins. And that's the way it should be. The bigger the society, the
more heterogeneous, the more fraught with inequality, injustice, grudges,
prejudice, or when you're lucky, preferences. The complex structure of large
societies force us to get to know strangers, to help each other through the
hard stuff, its not easy, but its worth it.

When the Internet went mainstream, there was an moment called Eternal
September. Until then, the Internet was the domain mostly of people with
privilege, many of which had technical interest or commitments in how the
Internet worked. Of course they were civil to each other, like colleagues at
a big factory.  And this big polyphonous civility led many to extrapolate that
the Internet could bring about a new era of human exchange, radically cutting
across all the ills and trauma that had accompanied humanity to this
apotheosis.

But there already were indications for concern that things may not work out so
smoothly. Every September, a new coterie of university students would get
access to the Internet through their institutions. This increasingly diverse
student body would instantly engage in all manner of experimental, irreverent
behaviour, and, every September, those who had seen it all, and learnt how to
get along online had to instruct the newcomers how to avoid conflict and strife
so that all could benefit from the network together.  Then came commercial
providers and the floodgates opened. The small town became a bustling
megalopolis overnight and it was impossible to imagine anything like netiquette
as such ever again.  And rightly so.  The Internet came to resemble more truly
the societies which had spawned it, with all its injustice, hate, hope,
striving and strife.

The general purpose Internet wasn’t ever going to be the emancipatory
environment it was advertised to be. How could it be? As Andrew Feenberg states
in his “10 Paradoxes of technology”[^1] the way technologies have developed
should not be seen as producing the best possible outcomes, such that the
technologies we have around us today are the manifest destiny of technological
progress.  No, at every stage, the radically emancipatory potential of
technologies is constrained by social imperatives. And in our age the top
imperative comes from the top, from the investor class who rules the production
chains.

When the satisfactory deployment of any new technology is always proportional
to how much investment is attracted, its obvious that new technologies will
only be implemented in ways which suit the interests of the investor classes,
which are to make as much money in as short a time as possible, by enclosing
and extracting maximum value from users. This drive to the bottom, producing
platforms which maximise sensationalism, conflict and controversy while at the
same time spying on and manipulating their users behaviour, fulfil this
short-term profit imperative best, producing a world of fly-by-night, maximally
exploitative commercial entities which rile us up, burn us out, and leave us
and our real social construction in the dust. On one hand the Internet offered
“easy social” interaction, because anyone could make an account on a commercial
platform and begin to engage, on the other hand this engagement was itself part
of the profit model of the platform and so was subject to the priorities of the
platform’s investors.

In the 1930s in Germany, when the new technology of radio emerged, it was taken
up by the many trained electronics engineers in the populace. An unprecedented
new media form sprung up and became immensely popular: “Arbeiterfunk”.  Within
months, dozens of independent workers radio stations had begun exploring all
that a networked medium could perform in their community. The programming was
eclectic and creative, new forms of worker’s opera, education, news and debate
began to emerge. Of course all this was far too threatening for the powers that
be and within 6 months, the Arbeiterfunk movement was crushed by the imposition
of “license fees” for the operation of radios and extremely heavy penalties for
contravening the censorious broadcast laws, invoked, of course, in the interest
of public safety.

Today, as the American and European empires falter,  we see a new looming
crackdown on popular communication space. It starts with enemies of decency, but
soon enough it is likely to spread to assign all manner of dissent as being
threats to public safety. Easy social media will not help us contend with the
coming challenges. We need uneasy social, social engagement where your
experience expands and improves the more you share, learn and exchange with
other people.  In uneasy social, soci-ability combines social and ability, you
develop real relationships with people who help you and you help get the most
out of the platform.

Unlike easy social where the platform extracts a hefty price for the ease of
interaction and the narrow freedoms of indifference and dissociation, in uneasy
social, the platform provides the minimum viable infrastructure for the robust
social construction which can only emerge in community together. In uneasy
social, everything you can do on the platform is made by someone you know, so
you can ask how it works.  Contributing to the social construction means
getting to know others as co-creators and comrades.

For transmediale, Telekommunisten retrieves uneasy social technology from the
dawn of the Internet age in the form of a MOO.  A MOO[^2] is a pre-cloud and
pre-web fully programmable social environment, first developed in the 90s,
where the environment can be infinitely expanded as desired by the users.   In
this work of uneasily socialist contemporary networked artwork, valencies of
social interaction are radically emancipated, all manner of new modes of social
being can not only be designed, they can be co-designed, experienced and lived
together. Uneasy social builds real social bonds because these serve purposes,
there is a real economy of friendship in the network, because everyone’s
satisfaction depends on everyone else.

Easy social merely means the hard part is being hidden from view, but we all
know this hiding comes at a price! Real social is uneasy, cringe at times, but
we bear with it because of the perks.  Come rediscover the benefits of uneasy
social at the Telekommunisten Assembly!  Local networked media art hosted on
a little board beneath a love seat in Prenzlauer Berg!  MOO programming
sessions every month!

The Telekommunisten Assembly: https://asym.me/assembly/ or join us by telnet
`assembly.asym.me port 7777`

need help? just ask in the MOO or join our discord!
https://discord.gg/tZymcq4XTW

--- 
[^1]: https://www.sfu.ca/~andrewf/paradoxes.pdf
[^2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MOO


